Pokhara University
Faculty of Science and Technology

Course No.: CMP264 Full marks: 100
Course title: Theory of Computation (3-1-0) Pass marks: 45
Nature of the course: Theory Total Lectures: 45 hrs
Level: Bachelor Program: BE (Computer)
1. Course Description
This course is designed to provide basic knowledge of the theory of automata, formal languages and
computational complexity.
2. General Objectives
● To acquaint the students with the basic knowledge of automata and formal languages.
● To develop the skills in students to design various types of automata and analyze them.
● To acquaint the students with the concepts of computability, computational bounds and
computational complexity.
3. Methods of Instruction
Lecture, Discussion, Readings, Tutorials.
4. Contents in Detail.
Specific Objectives Contents
- Understand the concept of
alphabet and language
Unit 1: Introduction (4 hrs.)
1.1 Review of set, relation and function
1.2 Proof techniques– proof by contradiction, pigeon
hole principle, induction and diagonalization.
1.3 Alphabets and language
1.4 Chomsky’s hierarchy? 
- Design and implement the
deterministic and nondeterministic finite automata.
- Develop the equivalence of
regular languages and finite
automata
Unit 2: Finite Automata and Regular Language (10
hrs)
2.1 Deterministic Finite Automata, Non‐Deterministic
Finite Automata
2.2 Regular expressions and regular language,
equivalence of regular language and finite automata
2.3 Properties of regular language
2.4 Pumping lemma for regular sets
2.5 Closure properties of regular sets
2.6 Decision algorithms for regular sets
- Explain the theory and design
of context-free grammar and
pushdown automata and their
equivalence.
- Explore the derivation trees,
simplification and formal
forms of context-free
grammar.
Unit 3: Context-Free Language and Pushdown
Automata (13 hrs)
3.1 Context-free grammar
3.2 Derivative trees and simplification of context-free
grammar
3.3 Normal forms (CNF, GNF)
3.4 Pushdown automata (formal description and final
state PDA design)
3.5 Equivalence of pushdown automata and contextfree grammar
3.6 Properties of context-free languages (CFL)
3.7 Pumping lemma for CFL’s
3.8 Closure properties of CFL’s
3.9 Decision algorithms for CFL’s
- Explain the theory and
significance of Turing
machines
- Explain computing
mechanism and extensions of
Turing machines
- Understand the computable
languages, functions and
unrestricted grammar
Unit 4: Turing Machines (10 hrs)
4.1 Introduction to Turing machine
4.2 Computing with Turing machine
4.3 Extensions of Turing machine
4.4 Unrestricted grammar
4.6 Recursively enumerable languages
- Use the idea of undecidability
introducing Church-Turing
thesis and the halting problem
- Understand the universal
Turing machines and
undecidable problems of
Turing machines
Unit 5: Undecidability (4 hrs)
5.1 The Church‐Turing thesis
5.2 Halting Problem
5.3 Universal Turing machines
5.4 Undecidable problems about Turing machines
5.5 Properties of Recursive and Recursively
enumerable languages. 
- Understand the concept of
computational complexity
and different classes of
problems
Unit 6: Computational Complexity (4 hrs)
6.1 Introduction to Complexity theory, tractable and
intractable problems.
6.3 Class P and Class NP problems
6.4 NP‐complete problems.
5. List of Tutorials:
The various tutorial activities that suit this course should cover all the content of this course to give
students a space to engage more actively with the course content in the presence of the instructor.
Students should submit tutorials as assignments or class-works to the instructor for evaluation. The
following tutorial activities of 15 hours per group of maximum 24 students should be conducted to cover
the content of this course:
A. Discussion-based Tutorials: (2 hrs)
1. Review discussion on set theory concepts like functions, relations, etc.
2. Discussion on the theoretical meaning and significance of computation and computers
3. A study and presentation can be done on the history of computation and Alan Turing as the father
of computation (Oral Presentation).
B. Problem solving-based Tutorials: (8 hrs)
1. Solve problems to design deterministic and non-deterministic finite automata (DFA and NDFA) to
recognize/generate given regular languages.
2. To develop regular expressions to recognize/generate given regular languages.
3. To convert a given NDFA to DFA.
4. To design Context-Free Grammar (CFG) to recognize/generate given Context-Free Language
(CFL)
5. To simply a given CFG and convert it into CNF and GNF
6. To design Pushdown Automata (PDA) to recognize/generate given Context-Free Language (CFL)
7. To design Turing machines to recognize/generate given languages
C. Review and Question/Answer-based Tutorials: (5 hrs)
1. Case study of examples of DFA, PDA and Turing Machines for some practical tasks followed by
Oral Presentation/demonstration in class.
2. Case study of Unsolvable problems such as the Tiling problem followed by Oral Presentation in
class.
3. Case study of Class NP and NP-complete problems (eg, Travelling Salesman Problem) followed
by Oral Presentation in class.
7. Evaluation system and Students’ Responsibilities
Internal Evaluation 
The internal evaluation of a student may consist of assignments, attendance, internal assessment, etc.
The internal evaluation scheme for this course is as follows:
Internal Evaluation Weight Marks External Evaluation Marks
Theory 50
Semester-End
examination
50
Attendance & Class Participation 10%
Assignments 20%
Presentations/Quizzes 10%
Internal Assessment 60%
Total Internal 50
Full Marks: 50 + 50 = 100
Student Responsibilities:
Each student must secure at least 45% marks separately in internal assessment and practical evaluation
with 80% attendance in the class in order to appear in the Semester End Examination. Failing to get such
a score will be given NOT QUALIFIED (NQ) to appear for the Semester-End Examinations. Students
are advised to attend all the classes, formal exam, test, etc. and complete all the assignments within the
specified time period. Students are required to complete all the requirements defined for the completion
of the course.
8. Prescribed Books and References
Text Books:
1. Lewis, H. R., & Papadimitriou, C. H., Elements of theory of computation, Pearson Education.
2. R. McNaughton, Elementary Computability, Formal Languages, and Automata, Prentice Hall of
India.
3. Hopcroft, J. E., Motwani, R., & Ullman, J. D. (2008). Introduction to automata theory,
languages, and computation. Pearson.
References:
1. M. Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Thomson Course Technology
2. E. Engeler, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Academic Press. 
